I want to begin with a hypothetical situation for related hypothetical scenarios.
And what I'd like you to do is think how you would approach these, but just kind of keep it to yourself.
Don't say it out loud, what you would do.
But just in your own mind, sort of answer the questions.
So here we go, scenario number one, you're the city manager for Grand Rapids.
Now Grand Rapids is the kind of city where it's not the mayor who runs the city, it's the city manager who runs the city.
So you're responsible for the whole city, lots of people report to you, lots of responsibilities, big budget, lots of stress and things that go with that.
Imagine that you're the city manager for Grand Rapids and that one day you're out sort of downtown walking on the street.
Now you're busy, you got a lot going on, you have a lot you're responsible for.
And somebody recognizes you walking downtown Grand Rapids, total stranger, you don't know them, never seen them before.
They stop you and say, hey, aren't you the city manager?
I've got a great idea that's gonna make this city a lot better.
Can I have an appointment to come see you and pitch you my idea?
Now here's the question I just want you to answer silently in your own head.
Would you make time in your schedule for that person?
All right, second scenario.
You're still the city manager.
You're still walking the street downtown.
And the person who comes up to you this time is not a stranger.
You see them and you recognize them immediately.
They are your adult daughter's best friend.
They've been friends with your daughter for a long, long time.
You've known them most of your life.
This person says to you, hey, I've been thinking, I've got a great idea that's gonna make this city better.
Could I have some of your time to be able to sit down with you and tell you my idea?
Are you more likely to give that person time than the total stranger in scenario one?
All right, you're just answering these questions in your head.
Third scenario, you're still the city manager.
You're still walking down Monroe or wherever you are downtown.
This time the person that comes up to you is actually your son-in-law.
He's married to that adult daughter and he's a very good kind son-in-law.
He takes really good care of your daughter.
And he walks up and he's like, hey dad, it's just funny that I run into you.
You know, I've been thinking about an idea that would be really great for the city.
Could I make some time in your schedule to come see you and tell you my idea?
Are you more likely to give him a slot in your schedule?
then you were the total stranger that came up to you on the city streets.
All right, fourth and final scenario.
You're still the city manager.
You're still downtown.
The person coming up to you is still your son-in-law this time.
But this time when he approaches you, he says, dad, I know you've been stressing out and thinking a lot about revenue for the city.
As I've been thinking about it with you, I've got a great idea how we could raise more revenues in the city.
Would you mind if I made an appointment to come see you so we could talk about it?
Are you more willing to give him the time in that situation on your busy schedule?
All right, thank you for not answering any of those questions out loud.
This morning,
We're talking about prayer.
Now in the book of 1 John, the book is written in part to help us understand the benefits of receiving Jesus in our lives.
One of the greatest benefits is that because of Jesus, we have access to the Father, where we can come and say to Him, ask Him anything that we want.
And so this morning we want to think together about this privilege of prayer.
We want to think together about the confidence that we as children of God should have when we come to God in prayer.
And then I want to say a word about the contents of what we should be praying about.
So let me invite you to take a Bible and turn to the book of 1 John chapter 5, 1 John 5.
If you didn't bring a Bible with you, or maybe you're not that familiar with the Bible, there's a Bible in the rack in front of you.
If you take one of those Bibles and open it up to page 988, you'll be in 1 John 5.
Page 988, 1 John is this little epistle, it's a little letter written by the Apostle John.
He wrote a gospel called the Gospel of John.
He wrote three epistles called 1st, 2nd, and 3rd John.
And he wrote the final book in the Bible called the Book of Revelation.
We're in the longest letter that he wrote, which is first John.
We're in chapter five and I'm gonna read for us verses 13 to 17.
So page 988, verses 13 to 17.
The Holy Spirit says, through the Apostle John, I write these things to you who believe in the name of the Son of God,
so that you may know that you have eternal life.
This is the confidence we have in approaching God, that if we ask anything according to His will, He hears us.
And if we know that He hears us, whatever we ask, we know that we have what we asked of Him.
If you see any brother or sister commit a sin that does not lead to death, you should pray and God will give them life.
I refer to those whose sin does not lead to death.
There is sin that leads to death.
I'm not saying you should pray about that.
All wrong doing is sin, and there is sin that does not lead to death.
We begin our passage this morning in the first section, thinking about the confidence God wants us to have in prayer.
In verse 13, John reaffirms what he said at the beginning
of this epistle, which is the great news is that we have received from God the gift that goes beyond possible imagination, the greatest gift of all time, not a thing, but a person.
We have received Jesus.
That's what 1 John is about, that God has given us the word of life.
Now in verse 13,
It may seem like the thing God has given us is eternal life.
It does say that.
You may know that you have eternal life, but if you look up just a couple of verses above it in verse 11, this is the testimony God has given us eternal life and this life is where?
In his son, to have eternal life, you receive the son.
It's a person.
It's not a thing.
And sometimes we get a little distracted because we think about the fact that, oh yes, I have received eternal life.
I've been given access to heaven.
But in reality, John is wanting to remind us all the stuff we get is because we receive a person, Jesus.
That when you buy faith except Jesus, when you establish a relationship with Jesus, when you get connected
to Jesus, John says what happens is as you're receiving from God Jesus and in our passage, that should give you confidence in prayer.
See verse 14, this is the confidence we have in approaching God.
This is the confidence that we've received Jesus, that we have a relationship with Jesus.
The reason we went through those four hypothetical scenarios
It's in the first scenario.
You're the city manager.
It's a total stranger.
My guess, if you're like me, you've got a busy schedule.
A total stranger walks up to you on the street, wants some time in your schedule.
You're probably going to be like, maybe not.
But in the second scenario, it's not a total stranger.
It's your adult daughter's best friend.
The reason I use that analogy is in John 15, Jesus says, when we receive Him, we become friends of Jesus.
Isn't that amazing?
If you're here today and you're like, I don't have any friends.
If you know Jesus, you have a friend.
Not just a Lord, but a friend.
He's like, I call you my friends.
I share with you what's going on in my life.
That's what makes us friends.
Well, John is saying,
When you are the friend of the Son of God and you show up to talk to God, guess what?
He's going to make time to talk to you.
In the third scenario, it was your son-in-law.
Now we use that analogy because when you and I receive Jesus, we become one with him.
Marriage is one really good example of what that looks like.
Two individuals become one in marriage.
God says, that's just a symbol of what actually happens when you receive Jesus.
When you receive Jesus, you become as intimately connected to Jesus as humanly possible.
You are one with Him.
So in our analogy, as the city manager, it's the son-in-law, a good son-in-law.
That's why we hadn't felt that way.
Who treats the daughter really well.
Are you going to give that person time?
Well, yes, of course.
John's saying, this is the confidence we have in approaching the Father.
We are one with the Son.
We are in the closest possible relationship to Jesus.
When we come to God and we're like, I'd like some time, the answer is always going to be yes.
Now the rest of verse 14 says that if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
That was the reason for the fourth scenario.
In the fourth scenario, it's not just the son-in-law that comes up.
The son-in-law says to the city manager, I know you're concerned about raising revenues in the city.
I want to talk to you about the thing you're wanting to talk about.
That's what John's saying is that when we come to God, wanting to talk about the things he wants to talk about, we can have absolute confidence that he's gonna listen to what we have to say.
Now, what are the things God wants to talk about?
We're gonna get to that in just a second.
But before we do, we have to address the elephant in the room.
The elephant in the room is verse 15.
And if we know that he hears us, whatever we ask, we know that we have what we asked of him.
The elephant in the room is that every single one of us have asked for things from God and not gotten them.
Right?
We've asked for things with good motives.
We've asked for things with prayer, with fasting.
We've begged God for things.
We found verses that said it seems like you want to do this.
We've really, really asked God in every possible way.
We asked other people to pray for us.
We did everything we can imagine to approach God and we didn't get what we asked for.
So what in the world is verse 15 talking about?
Well, if you can't tell, this has been a personal struggle for me, and not just a theoretical one.
There's been untold frustration of God, I'm doing the stuff.
I'm trying everything here.
I'm pretty sure you want to do this.
This feels like this would be the right thing to do, but you're not doing it.
And so in the personal struggle,
in God's kindness.
He's explained to me something that hopefully will be helpful for you about this idea.
It's just that he used in my life a different passage than verse 15.
It's related but different.
So I'd like to use that passage to try to explain what it is that God's at least taught me about this, that hopefully will be helpful for you.
It comes out of Matthew chapter seven, verses seven and eight.
This is Jesus speaking.
Ask,
and it will be given you.
Seek and you will find.
Knock and the door will be open to you.
For everyone who asks, receives, the one who seeks, finds, and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
Now that verse seems to be saying the same thing as verse 15, which is, yeah, just go ahead and ask and you're gonna get it.
There's not a lot of like exception clauses in this verse.
Ask and it will be given to you.
Everyone who asks receives.
It can be lonely to feel like, well, I'm asking and not receiving.
Am I not anybody?
Do I not qualify?
Well, in working through this God in his kindness, I will say the asking one was not that helpful for me.
The seeking one was not that helpful.
The knocking one was the one the Lord was like, let me explain it using that one.
And this was my understanding.
When you knock, that's a metaphor for prayer.
God said to me, have I ever not opened the door?
Do you imagine prayer is knocking on the door of heaven?
Have I ever heard a voice from the other side saying, you know, not today?
And the answer if I'm honest is no, never once.
Even when I'm mired in all sorts of sin, or he always opens the door.
And as the Lord sort of worked me through this, He's like, now what happens when a door opens?
Well, somebody either comes in or somebody comes out.
That's what doors are for.
And as I work through the imagery with the Lord and praying through it, the idea is listen, every single time you and I pray, we're knocking on the door of heaven.
And this verse and verse 15,
tell us every single time the door opens.
And who's on the other side of that door?
Jesus.
And in my mind's eye, God says, and look in his hands.
He's not coming empty-handed.
Now, it may not be the gift you asked for.
Maybe you're asking for healing.
He may not be holding healing in his hands.
It might be comfort for the fact that he's not healing you.
It might be a word of encouragement from a friend that comes at just the right time.
It might be a scripture passage that you'd never seen before.
It might be a good night's sleep when you haven't had one for a while.
It might be an explanation as to why God is choosing not to heal you.
But the truth is, Jesus never comes through that door empty-handed.
That's what this verse means.
When you ask, you will always receive something.
It may not be the thing you want it, but it's something.
When you seek, you will always find something because when you knock every single
time the door opens.
And every single time Jesus walks into the situation and He never comes empty-handed.
That's what verse 15 is saying in our passage.
God's not a vending machine.
He's not a genie.
He's not an automated assistant.
You don't sort of plug in the right words or put in enough money or do certain things and get an outcome.
He's the father, we're the children.
It's his will, not ours.
But the promise of verse 15, the confidence that you and I can have, because of our relationship with Jesus, he will always, always, always open the door.
And he will always, always, always bring something with him when he comes into the situation.
Verse 15 is not written to make excuses for God.
The purpose of verse 15 is not to try to say, well, he doesn't really do.
He sometimes does what he wants.
Verse 15 is trying to remind us every time you pray, every time, every time.
He opens the door.
and he brings something with him.
When we ask according to his will.
Now that raises the question that we kind of put on hold just a few minutes ago.
How do we know what we're supposed to pray?
The city manager obviously needs to raise revenues for the city.
Great.
What does God want us to talk to him about?
Well, that's verses 16 and 17.
This is not the only thing God wants us to talk to him about, but it's an example.
Basically, if you're going to see the city manager, like I wonder what the city manager is worried about.
Is he worried about snow removal?
Is she worried about raising revenue?
Is she worried about the police force?
What are the things she's worried about?
Verses 16 and 17 is telling us, if you're gonna knock on the door of heaven, you can ask for lots of stuff, but one of the things you and I should ask for, the contents of our prayer is found in Verses 16 and 17.
If you see any brother or sister commit a sin, you should pray and God will give them life.
One of the things God wants us to talk to him about, one of the things that's on his heart in mind is other believers who are struggling with sin.
He wants us to come and talk to him about that.
Stop in the city manager on the street to say, I got a plan for revenue because I know you're concerned about revenue.
Probably going to get you a time slot.
Talking to God about a brother or sister who's in sin is always going to get his attention because he's interested in that.
Now, the only trick is John has phrased what he said here in terms that confuse us.
because he talks about a sin that leads to death and sin that doesn't lead to death.
And that has created a lot of confusion.
Some people think that what John is doing is dividing sins up into two groups.
The Roman Catholics use this.
They'll talk about mortal sins, which is death sins and venial sins, which is not death sins.
Some people talk about the difference between intentional sin and unintentional sin, sinning with a hard heart versus sinning unintentionally.
I don't think that's what John is talking about here because all sin leads to death, not just certain kinds of sins.
Yes, in God's kingdom, some sins are worse than others or have different consequences than others, but the wages of all sin is death.
I don't think John is talking about just certain kinds of sin.
Another option is some people think that John is talking about blasphemy of the Holy Spirit, which is the refusal to believe that Jesus is the Messiah, or apostasy, the sort of walking away rejecting of Jesus, so that what John is talking about here is not actual sins you commit, but the idea that we're rejecting Jesus.
I don't think that's what he's talking about either, because in verse 16, he says, if you see any what?
Brother or sister, we're talking about Christians here.
We're not talking about people who committed blasphemy against the Holy Spirit or people who have walked away from the Lord in an apostate sort of way.
So what is John talking about when he talks about sins that lead to death and sins that don't lead to death?
I think it's a more basic answer.
In rare situations, when Christians sin,
The immediate result can be physical death.
In Acts chapter five, when Ananias and Sephira lied to the Holy Spirit, they die immediately.
Peter doesn't pray for them.
When Uza touches the ark in the Old Testament, he dies immediately.
David and nobody else prays for him because he's died.
John's like, this does occasionally happen.
It does occasionally happen that God institute the wages of sin immediately and death happens.
John's saying, we're just not talking about those rarer cases.
What we are talking about is the majority of cases where when sin happens, there is not immediate physical death.
And John says, that's when you and I are supposed to step in and start praying.
Let me give you some examples from the Bible as to what this looks like.
Genesis chapter 20.
Abraham is not told the truth about his wife, Sarah, as a result, a bimilek may end up the dangerous he could sleep with her.
There could be a sexual immorality that happens as a result of this.
So God appears to a bimilek in a dream and says to him, now return Abraham's wife for he's a prophet and he will pray for you and you will live.
But if you do not return her, you may be sure that you and all who belong to you will die.
Then Abraham prayed to God and God healed the bimilek
His wife and his female slaves so they could have children again, for the Lord had kept all the women in a bimilex household from conceiving because of Abraham's wife, Sarah.
Somehow because of this sin, I don't know that any of these women knew it, but in that moment, all of these women were under the judgment of God and God's like, you better ask Abraham and he'll pray for you.
And Abraham does 1 John 5, which is he prays and God hears it and he removes the sin.
Numbers 14.
The nation of Israel has refused to go into the promised land.
God is going to destroy them all.
Moses prays, in accordance with your great love, forgive the sin of these people, just as you have pardoned them from the time they left Egypt until now.
The Lord replied, I have forgiven them as you've asked.
Now if you compare that with Numbers 25, where they commit sexual immorality with the Moabites, there's no prayer that's offered there.
They just immediately die for doing that.
That's 1 John saying, those sins led to death.
But in Numbers 14, those sins did not lead to death, and so Moses' job is prayed for these people so that they won't die.
Job chapter one, when a period of feasting had run its course, Job would make arrangements for them, his children, to be purified.
Early in the morning, he would sacrifice a burnt offering for each of them thinking, perhaps my children have sinned and cursed God in their hearts.
This was Job's regular custom.
And then also at the end of Job,
after the Job's friends have sort of caused been a stumbling block to Job.
God says, so now take seven bowls and seven rams and go to my servant Job and sacrifice a burnt offering for yourselves.
My servant Job will pray for you and I will accept his prayer and not deal with you according to your folly.
These are all examples of people doing 1 John 5 verses 16 and 17, praying for those who have been tripped up by sin where the sin has not resulted in immediate death.
The most famous example of this is Jesus on the cross, praying Father, forgive them.
They don't know what they're doing.
This is what God is wanting to hear from us.
It's not the only thing he wants to hear from us, but if you're wondering, what is the thing that God wants me to come talk about?
One of the things you can be absolutely certain is on his mind is that God loves being merciful.
He loves it.
He delights in being merciful.
I don't know about you.
Maybe you woke up this morning like, man, I can't wait to have breakfast.
I can't wait to have lunch.
I can't wait to watch the Super Bowl.
Maybe there's all sorts of things that you and I delight in when God wakes up in the morning.
He doesn't wake up.
He's always awake.
But metaphorically, guess what he wants to do?
He wants to be merciful.
Like if you've ever had a day where you've been super excited, man, I cannot wait to get downstairs to play video games.
I cannot wait to open Christmas presents.
I cannot, whatever it is that in your heart, you're like, yes, that's the thing I most wanted to.
I cannot wait for a beautiful summer day at Lake Michigan when it's 80 degrees outside.
Whatever it is that you can't wait for, that's how God feels about being merciful.
That's what he loves to do.
And when you and I knock on the door and we're like, hey, can we talk about my wife?
Can we talk about my husband?
Can we talk about my kids?
Can we talk about my siblings?
Can we talk about my coworkers?
Can we talk about my friends at school?
I would like you to be merciful to them.
Guess what?
He's ecstatic to hear you say that.
He wants to have that conversation with us.
When we say to God, and look, Lord, please have mercy on them.
Please get them out of the sin.
Now, because we all have free will, he doesn't override our free will.
But he delights in being merciful.
He loves talking about these things.
And so if you want to pray anything that's in accordance with his will, if you want to pray anything that you know he's going to want to hear, 1 John 5, 16, and 7, and he says,
find somebody you know and somebody you love who's struggling with sin.
Maybe it's tripping them up.
Maybe they're deceived by it.
Maybe it's causing destruction in their life.
Ask God to set them free.
Ask God to be merciful.
Ask God to not treat them the way their sins deserve.
You will always, always find a ready audience wanting to talk to you about those things.